Hitachi Innovation Application
================
K Pembleton and A H Sparks
2016-11-08

Summary
-------

*Provide an overview of the research idea /project /technology / venture. Optional video up to 3 minutes that provides a summary of you, your team and idea for a wider audience to vote. (300 words max)*

Over $10 billion dollars' worth of crops are lost globally to extreme weather events (e.g. heat waves, frosts) every year. This is enough to feed 500 million people. A significant number of these crop failures are preventable if preventative/remedial action is taken in a timely manner. While early forecasting of extreme weather is becoming increasingly sophisticated and accurate, this, unfortunately is not translated into actions to mitigate the impacts of extreme weather. There are two key reasons for this, weather forecasts themselves don't convey any indication of the level of crop stress and, farmers often don't have the time or resources to interpret weather forecast information into actionable information. Our research is removing these two barriers to farmers around the world using weather forecasts so they can take timely actions that will prevent crop failures. We are using a range of weather data feeds and computational and crop modelling methodologies to interpret and convert weather forecasts into a crop stress forecast. Secondly, if there is a forecast for an event that is likely to cause crop damage a text message or email alert is sent to the farmer via their smart phone. By providing this alert several days prior to the stress event we ensure that famers have the opportunity to undertake some preventative actions to minimise damage (e.g. harvest early or apply mitigating irrigations) and hence save their crops. The system is designed to operate autonomously. The only thing a farmer has to do is subscribe by providing an email address or mobile phone number and their location. Our system is helping farmers make the right decisions at the right time to prevent crop losses due to extreme weather. This will boost food production, improve the livelihoods of farmers and their communities and help feed a growing global population.

Innovation
----------

*How is your project innovative? Please compare it with current approaches. Only judges and organisers will see this section. (500 words max)*

The current approach to giving farmers the tools they need to prevent crop failures is to saturate farmers with ever increasing amounts of forecast information and to focus on increasing the accuracy and spatial resolution of weather forecasts. While these efforts are of value scientifically and can help governments and institutions manage extreme weather events at a regional level, they do little to address farmer's needs for simple, timely and easy to action information. Our customer discovery process to date has identified that farmers are saturated with data and information. This saturation actually hinders decision making as the oversupply of data leads to "decision paralysis". The time required to work through and interpret this data into information they can make a decision on is often prohibitive. Consequently current weather forecast information is often ignored or at the very least not acted on. The innovative aspect of our project is that we are developing systems that source weather forecast data and undertakes the data analytics and interpretation on behalf of the farmer. It then alerts them if a crop stress event is likely to occur. In essence, our project is giving growers directly actionable information in a timely manner in place of them having to invest considerable time in analysing data and information to assess the likelihood of a stress event. It is removing the barriers to farmers using weather forecasts to prevent crop failures and empowers them to confidently take actions to save their crops. To do this we are linking a range of weather forecasts and weather models with crop modelling methodologies. We are doing this in a cloud computing environment with the open source, community driven "R" statistical programing language. Our analysis identifies not only if a crop is going to be exposed to an extreme weather event but the likely intensity of that exposure. This level of detail not possible to garner from typical weather forecasts, however, this level of detail is critical as the response required from farmers to a mild stress event is very different to the response required to a severe stress event. While it would be possible to build a smart phone app to present the alert to farmer, we have chosen a relatively simpler approach of using email and text messaging alerts as it easily translate across devices and will also function with non-smart phone devices. Also the infrastructure underpinning these services are much more robust and less prone to outages than services requiring higher data usage. This ensure that our solution can reliably reach the greatest number of people.

Impact
------

*Describe the likely local to global-scale impact of your project being a success. Provide details on the likely time-frame for social impact to occur. Only judges and organisers will see this section. (500 words max)*

In agriculture, the considerable financial investment made in growing crops along with considerable lead times for realising a return on this investment means farmers are particularly exposed to the risk of crop failures. At a local scale our project's impact will be greater resilience within farming families and their communities. Crop damage/loss due to extreme weather can put a considerable strain on farmer's and a community's resources. Empowering and facilitating farmers to take actions to minimise/prevent crop failures and damage due to extreme weather reduce this financial pressure. This in turn will translate into more resilient and vibrant communities at a regional level as greater amounts of agricultural revenues flow into and become available within them. At a global level a reduction in crop failures will increase food supply and food security. This is one of the key ways that food production can be increased to feed a growing global population. The time scale for this impact should be relatively quick. The enabling infrastructure for this system exist (mobile phone networks) and over 75% of the world's population have access to a mobile phone.

Feasibility
-----------

*Describe how the idea/solution has a good chance of success. What type of prior knowledge, prototypes or prior insights can you provide to help assess the likelihood of success? Only Judges and organisers will see this section. (500 words max)*

We have an early stage prototype of our solution that proves that the various components of the system can been linked and function together. This prototype was recently judged the winner of the "Paddock to Plate" category in the 2016 "GovHack" awards. Associate Professor Adam Sparks, the leader of the summer crops pathology team in the Centre for Crop Health at the University of Southern Queensland USQ specialises in crop diseases and weather modelling. Previously, while working at the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) in Los Baños, Philippines, A/Prof Sparks was involved in several projects in developing countries which made use of mobile technology to collect and disseminate data and cloud computing systems like Amazon Web Services (AWS), e.g. the Philippine Rice Information System (PRiSM, <http://www.philippinericeinfo.ph/>). Dr Keith Pembleton is the leader of the Agricultural Systems Modelling Research Group in the Institute for Agriculture and the Environment at USQ. He specialises in crop modelling and the design and use of decision support tools in agriculture. He has helped design several decision support platforms (e.g. YieldWise <http://yieldwise.agmodelling.com/>, ARMonline <http://iage.usq.edu.au/>) that ingest complex data feeds through biophysical crop models and presents the results in simple to understand formats focused at farmers. These expertise along with the early stage prototype virtually ensures that the technology itself can be implemented. The project has a strong chance of having a sizable impact at a local and global level. Seventy-five percent of the world's population have access to a mobile phone. Our text messaging/email alert system is a low data use system, which removes data cost and data speed as a barrier to farmers accessing our solution. Text message systems have been proven to work in natural disaster warning systems in both the developed and developing world. This indicates that this approach to disseminating information and getting it acted on is a viable solution to the problem.
